Document a recipe for establishing SNMP tunnels using socat/SSH (#2435)
Uninett/nav: doc/hacking/snmp-tunnels.rst

=========================================
Establishing SNMP tunnels using socat/SSH
=========================================

While developing new functionality related to SNMP collection in NAV,
a developer's workstation isn't necessarily attached to a network that
provides the developer with the necessary access to communicate with the
required set of switches/routers etc. For internal equipment, this is

> usually solved by connection a VPN, but sometimes, the devices one needs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
usually solved by connecting via VPN, but sometimes, the devices one needs
```

to talk to is located at a customer site where there is no VPN access.

In the case of having SSH access to a Linux server at the customer premises,
that is allowed to communicate with the customer's switches and routers,
one can establish an SNMP tunnel to the customer's equipment using a
combination of SSH and socat.

This guide will document two ways to establish such an SNMP tunnel: one using
docker and one without.

Course of action - with docker
==============================

> 1. Copy the content of `docker-compose.snmp.yml` into
>    `docker-compose.override.yml` or later run docker-compose like this:
>    `docker compose -f docker-compose.yml -f docker-compose.snmp.yml up`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Copy the content of :file:`docker-compose.snmp.yml` into
   :file:`docker-compose.override.yml` or later run docker-compose like this:
   ``docker compose -f docker-compose.yml -f docker-compose.snmp.yml up``.
```

> 2. Change the line `command: 192.168.0.1 user@my-hop-host 10000` to the ip

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Change the line ``command: 192.168.0.1 user@my-hop-host 10000`` to the ip
```

   address or name of the device you want to reach, the relevant hop host and
   whatever port you want to tunnel through.

3. Make sure that ssh key to the hop host is saved (you can test this by doing

>    `ssh user@my-hop-host`, it is saved if you're not promted for a password).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ``ssh user@my-hop-host``, it is saved if you're not prompted for a password).
```

   If you haven't generated an SSH key yet you can run `ssh-keygen` and follow

>    the promts. Afterwards you can use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   the prompts. Afterwards you can use
```

>    `ssh-copy-id -i ~/.ssh/mykey user@my-hop-host` to copy that key to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ``ssh-copy-id -i ~/.ssh/mykey user@my-hop-host`` to copy that key to the
```

   server.

4. Now you can start nav.

> 5. In SeedDB: Add a management profile with the password for the device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. In SeedDB: Add an SNMP management profile with the community for the device.
```

6. In SeedDB: Add an IP device with the IP "mydevice.mydomain" and the

>    management profile created in 5. Click on "check connectivity", should

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   management profile created in step 5. Click on "check connectivity", which should
```

   be answering "ok".

Troubleshooting - with docker
=============================
When starting docker:

- the error message

>   `mydevice.mydomain_1  | bind [::1]:10000: Cannot assign requested address`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ``mydevice.mydomain_1  | bind [::1]:10000: Cannot assign requested address``
```

  can be ignored, it should still work

> - when the error message

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- if the error message
```

>   `mydevice.mydomain_1  | 2023/02/21 13:36:11 socat[1744] E bind(5,
>   {AF=2 0.0.0.0:10000}, 16): Address already in use`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ``mydevice.mydomain_1  | 2023/02/21 13:36:11 socat[1744] E bind(5,
  {AF=2 0.0.0.0:10000}, 16): Address already in use``
```

  appears: change the port in the docker file

When adding IP device in SeedDB:

- if an error message appears go into the docker container using

>   `docker-compose exec nav /bin/bash` and do `ping mydevice.mydomain`, if that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ``docker-compose exec nav /bin/bash`` and do ``ping mydevice.mydomain``. If that
```

  works, then make sure you're using the right management profile, because

>   tunneling works

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  tunneling works.
```

Course of action - without docker
=================================

1. Forward a TCP port from your machine to another, which has the necessary
   SNMP access level.

   .. code-block:: sh

      ssh -L 1161:localhost:1161 user@the-machine-with-access

2. Then, on that port, set up a UDP-to-TCP tunnel using socat on that machine:

   .. code-block:: sh

      socat tcp4-listen:1161,reuseaddr,fork UDP:ip-or-name-of-switch-to-talk-to:161

3. In a different terminal window, on your localhost, set up a socat
   tunnel to tunnel UDP traffic on port 161 through the forwarded TCP port
   (sudo is necessary because you need to bind to port 161, which only root can do):

   .. code-block:: sh

      sudo socat -T15 udp4-recvfrom:161,reuseaddr,fork tcp:localhost:1161

> 4. Finally to test connectivity in another terminal window:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Finally, to test connectivity in another terminal window:
```

   .. code-block:: sh

      snmpwalk -v2c -c public localhost SNMPv2-MIB::system

   (replace ``public`` with the respective community string if it differs)

5. When tunneling works you can add a new management profile with the
   respective community string the switch uses to NAV.

6. Then add an IP device with that management profile and 127.0.0.1 as
   IP address.

Troubleshooting - without docker
================================

- if in step 2 the error "Address already in use" appears, you can figure
  out which process is using it by running

  .. code-block:: sh

>       sudo netstat -aupn

Reviewer: Maybe note that this command is Linux-specific (`-aupn` will not work for netstat on BSD or MacOS, for example)

=========================================
Establishing SNMP tunnels using socat/SSH
=========================================

While developing new functionality related to SNMP collection in NAV,
a developer's workstation isn't necessarily attached to a network that
provides the developer with the necessary access to communicate with the

> require set of switches/routers etc. For internal equipment, this is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
required set of switches/routers etc. For internal equipment, this is
```

usually solved by connection a VPN, but sometimes, the devices one needs

> to talk to are located at a customer site where there is no VPN access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to talk to is located at a customer site where there is no VPN access.
```

In the case of having SSH access to a Linux server at the customer premises,
that is allowed to communicate with the customer's switches and routers,

> one can establish a SNMP tunnel to the customer's equipment using a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
one can establish an SNMP tunnel to the customer's equipment using a
```

combination of SSH and socat.

> This guide will document a way to establish such a SNMP tunnel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide will document a way to establish such an SNMP tunnel.
```

Course of action
================

1. Forward a TCP port from your machine to another, which has the necessary
   SNMP access level.

   .. code-block:: sh

      ssh -L 1161:localhost:1161 user@the-machine-with-access

2. Then, on that port, set up a UDP-to-TCP tunnel using socat on that machine:

   .. code-block:: sh

>        socat tcp4-listen:1161,reuseaddr,fork UDP:ip-or-name-of-switch-to-talk-to:161

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      socat tcp4-listen:1161,reuseaddr,fork UDP:ip-or-name-of-switch-to-talk-to:161
```

> 3. In a different terminal window, on our your localhost, set up a socat

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. In a different terminal window, on your localhost, set up a socat
```

   tunnel to tunnel UDP traffic on port 161 through the forwarded TCP port
   (sudo is necessary because you need to bind to port 161, which only root can do):

   .. code-block:: sh

      sudo socat -T15 udp4-recvfrom:161,reuseaddr,fork tcp:localhost:1161

4. Finally to test connectivity in another terminal window:

   .. code-block:: sh

      snmpwalk -v2c -c public localhost SNMPv2-MIB::system

>    (replace public with the respective community string if it differs)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   (replace ``public`` with the respective community string if it differs)
```

5. When tunneling works you can add a new management profile with the
   respective community string the switch uses to NAV.

6. Then add an IP device with that management profile and your own IP
   address, which you can find out by running:

   .. code-block:: sh

>       curl ifconfig.me

Reviewer: More likely, if you are running the tunnel from your localhost and NAV is also running on your localhost, you only need to use `127.0.0.1` as the address of the switch when you add it to NAV.

Reviewer: Also, this recipe doesn't work if you are on a NATted network.

Troubleshooting
===============

- if in step 2 the error "Address already in use" appears, you can figure
  out which process is using it by running

  .. code-block:: sh

      sudo netstat -aupn

  and then potentially killing the process by running

  .. code-block:: sh

      sudo kill process_id

>   If the process restarts on its own it might help to run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If the process restarts on its own it might be that you need to kill its 
  parent process. This command can help identify the parent process:
```

  .. code-block:: sh

      ps axuwf

>   instead and kill the parent process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This guide will document a way to establish such an SNMP tunnel.

> It does not work if you are on a NATted network.

Reviewer: That was not the point of my comments in my previous review. Tunneling will still work through a NATted network.

*Specifically, using `curl ifconfig.me` to get your own IP address does not work when you're on a NATted network.*

My point was that in many cases, you won't care about your public IP address, since you will be running NAV in development on your localhost, and setting up the tunnel from your localhost, so using 127.0.0.1 is fine.

However, things get slightly more complicated if you add Docker in the mix, by using the docker-compose dev environment, which we usually do in the NAV team.

If your host OS is Linux, you can get away with using the internal router address your docker containers are talking through:

Example from a `nav` container within docker-compose:

```console
root@ca5bc4f41655:/# ip route
default via 172.27.0.1 dev eth0
172.27.0.0/16 dev eth0 proto kernel scope link src 172.27.0.4
```

My host can be reached as `172.27.0.1` here.

However, in Docker on MacOS (and likely Windows too) it's not that simple, and you're better off using your host's address on the LAN you're connected to. How to find your LAN IP without talking to an external service varies wildly between operating systems and your hardware.

Specifically, on a Mac connected to a wireless network, you can ⌥+click on the WiFi-symbol on the top menu line, and a menu with connection details, including your IP address, should appear.

Other options include establishing the tunnel from within the docker container you will be using it from. In that case, you can still use 127.0.0.1. Or, you could add an extra container to your docker-compose network whose sole purpose is to act as an SNMP forwarder. The latter could be extra useful if you want to forward traffic to multiple SNMP agents. You could define a service for each of them in `docker-compose.override.yml`.

Reviewer: Come to think of it: My last idea for this has actually been sort of implemented but not completely documented in NAV: In `docker-compose.yml` you will find a commented-out service entry that sets up SNMP forwarding using SSH and socat as a service container, just as I described:

https://github.com/Uninett/nav/blob/16bb0c59ff79a43c816c539a86e76f89cc77c3b6/docker-compose.yml#L105-L107

This is even facilitated by a script provided in NAV: 

https://github.com/Uninett/nav/blob/master/tools/forward/snmp_forward.sh

You  might actually want to test out this latter approach and include that in the docs too :)
